# Comparison of compression algorithms

This project is an implementation and comparison of two data compression
algorithms, Huffman coding and LZ77. This is a project for the course
"Aineopintojen harjoitustyö: tietorakenteet ja algoritmit" at the University of
Helsinki.

## Building the project

### Dependencies

The following programs are required for all Make targets and must be installed
and available in the path:
- Go version 1.14 or later
- GNU Make

Some targets require more dependencies in addition to the ones above.

If you want to run `make lint`, you need
- golint

If you want to build the documentation (only necessary if you want to edit it),
you need
- gnuplot
- Graphviz command line tool

If you want to run generate the performance report, you need
- GNU time

### Build commands

The compression programs can be built by running `make all` at the root of the
repository.

`make lint` runs `go vet` and `golint` on the project.

`make test` executes unit tests and writes a test coverage report to
`cover.out`. The report can be viewed by running
```
go tool cover -html=cover.out
```
An online test coverage report can be found [here](https://codecov.io/gh/lassilaiho/compression-algorithms-tiralabra).

`make perf-report` generates the performance report. This can take a long time.

`make gendocs` generates documentation from `.template.md` files in `docs`
directory. This target requires the files generated by `make perf-report`.
Because generating the performance report is so slow, it is not done automatically.

## Documentation

[Design document](docs/design-document.md)

[Implementation document](docs/implementation.md)

[Testing document](docs/testing.md)

[User manual](docs/user-manual.md)

## Weekly reports

- [Week 1](docs/weekly-reports/week1.md)
- [Week 2](docs/weekly-reports/week2.md)
- [Week 3](docs/weekly-reports/week3.md)
- [Week 4](docs/weekly-reports/week4.md)
- [Week 5](docs/weekly-reports/week5.md)
- [Week 6](docs/weekly-reports/week6.md)
- [Week 7](docs/weekly-reports/week7.md)
